INTRODUCTION

*Library Management System is a term for computer-based system that manage the
catalogue of a library. The main purpose of this system is to manage library daily
operation efficiently.
*The library management deals in management of records. The records include books which
are required by different students accordingly. Maintaining these records manually becomes
difficult thus we are proving such system a computerized backend.

Objectives of Library Management System

a) To build a system that can receive input and generate automatically output in easy
way and short time.
b) Provide timely access to requested materials.
c) Simplify search/discovery of library resources.
d) To build a monitoring system that is able to monitor and manage all library operations
efficiently.
e) A search column to search availability of books

USER REQUIREMENTS

*The application is designed for the use of librarians and library users.
*This system provides a user-friendly data entry with dropdown
button menu, list box and checkbox in purpose to make the input entry easier to
understand and use. 
*It is also created to ensure that the library items are stored properly in
order to maintain their security

HOW?

This system will store all the books and members information that consist book numbers,
book titles, author names and racks to the system database. It also provides search
function to help students find the book by number of book. Search function will search
through the books database to look for the book and view where the book is situated.

DRAWBACKS OF EXISTING SYSTEM:

1) The records stored manually can be altered by unauthorized person
2) Searching any information is difficult, since all the cards are to be checked.
3) Generation of fine on late return is difficult to calculate.
4) Problem arises if any of the records get misplaced.

FUTURE SCOPE:

To enter and preserve details of the various issues and keep a track on their returns.
1) Online book issue
2) Request column for librarian for providing new book.
3) A separate column for digital library.
4) Student login page where student can find books issued by him/her and date of return

PROBLEMS FACED/DRAWBACKS:

1)File lost
2)File damaged
3)Difficult to search record
4)Space consuming
5)Cost consuming

BACKGROUND OF PROJECT:

Library Management System is an application which refers to library systems which are    
generally small or medium in size. 
It is used by librarian to manage the library using a
computerized system where he/she can record various transactions like issue of books,
return of books, addition of new books, addition of new students etc.